Reliable Data
Transfer and TCP
Flow Control
Join the lecture online on your dashboard
Layers recap
Building reliability from an unreliable
               channel
Transmission control protocol


 Establishes connection prior to data transmission.
 Maintains data integrity using sequence numbers,
 acknowledgments and checksums.
 Ensures reliable, ordered delivery of data packets,
 handling any loss.
 Handles the connection tear down process as well...
TCP Connection Teardown
TCP has a polite "goodbye" process. It's usually a 4-
Way Handshake.
Step 1: The "I have to go." (FIN)
The client sends a FIN packet (for "finish")
Step 2: The "Okay." (ACK)
The server receives this and acknowledges it.
Step 3: The "I'm done too." (FIN)
Once the server has finished sending any remaining data, it
sends its own FIN packet.
Step 4: The Final "Bye." (ACK)
Your client gets the server's FIN and sends one last ACK.
Wireshark TCP echo server follow up




                                      7
Checksums:
As TCP aims to provide reliable data transfer, checksum detects transmission errors so that
corrupted data can be retransmit.

Let's imagine a tiny piece of data Alice wants to send, broken into two 8-bit chunks:
Chunk 1: 10010011 (which is 147 in decimal)
Chunk 2: 01010110 (which is 86 in decimal)
Step 1: Sender's Side (Alice): TCP adds these two chunks together.
Checksums:

Step 2: TCP takes that carry-over 1 and adds it to the result.




Step 3: Finally, it performs a "1's complement" (it flips all the bits) to create the checksum.
So checksum becomes 11110101.
Checksums:

Alice sends the original data chunks and this checksum (11110101)
to Bob.


Bob performs the same calculation on the data it received


And then adds the checksum it received.




If the final result is all 1s, TCP knows with high probability that the data is perfect!   ✅
The Waiting Game:
Round Trip Time (RTT)
Alice needs a receipt (an ACK, or Acknowledgment)
from CAROL to know it arrived safely.
How long should she wait before she assumes the
page was lost? Ten milliseconds? A full second?
This is where the Round Trip Time (RTT) comes in.
It's the total time it takes for a segment to go from
Alice to CAROL and for CAROL's acknowledgment to
come back to Alice.
Round Trip Time (RTT)

      ping newtonschool.co   ping taobao.com
 Stop and Wait Protocol
Sliding Window Protocol



                          13
Why is Flow Control Needed?
   Not all devices have the same buffer size or
   processing power.

   A fast sender could flood a slow receiver,
   leading to packet loss or buffer overflow.

   TCP flow control prevents this by allowing the
   receiver to say:

   “Hey, slow down — I can only handle this much
right now.”
How Stop-and-Wait Works
 https://nstclassdemo2025.pages.dev/stop-and-wait


Sender: Transmits a data packet with sequence
number N
Sender: Stops all transmission and waits
Receiver: Receives packet N, processes it
Receiver: Sends ACK with acknowledgment
number N+1 (indicating "I received N, send me
N+1 next")
 Stop & Wait Mechanism

    Very inefficient for high-latency or high-
    bandwidth networks.
    Example: On a long-distance link, the
    sender wastes time waiting for each ACK
    before sending again.

Utilization is low:




            → transmission time                  → propagation delay
Sliding Window Protocol

 TCP uses a "sliding window protocol" to
 manage flow control.

 The receiver tells the sender how much
 data it can receive at a time (called the
 window size).

 As the receiver processes data and
 acknowledges packets, the sender "slides"
 the window forward and sends more.
How Sliding Window Protocol Works
 https://nstclassdemo2025.pages.dev/sliding-window
Zero Window Condition

A Zero Window condition occurs in TCP flow
control when the receiver's buffer is full, and it
temporarily tells the sender to stop sending data.


This is done by the receiver advertising a window
size of zero in the TCP header
Zero Window Condition
Zero Window Condition
  https://nstclassdemo2025.pages.dev/zero-window
Go-Back-N
   Go-Back-N (GBN) is an error control
   protocol       designed    for    reliable
   communication over noisy channels.


   It   enables    the    sender    to    send
   multiple frames before receiving an
   acknowledgment; however, if a frame
   is lost or erroneous, the sender must
   retransmit      that   frame     and     all
   subsequent frames.

https://computerscience.unicam.it/marcantoni/reti/applet/GoBackProtocol/goback.html
How Go-Back-N Works
 Sender sends N frames at once without waiting for individual ACKs.

 Receiver only accepts frames in order (i.e., sequentially).

 If a frame is lost or arrives corrupted, the receiver:

    Discards that frame and all that follow, even if they're correct.

 The sender goes back to the last acknowledged frame and retransmits

 all frames from there.
Selective Repeat
 Selective Repeat (SR) is an error-
 control     protocol    used     in     data
 transmission     to     ensure    reliable
 delivery over unreliable or noisy
 networks.


 Unlike Go-Back-N, it only retransmits
 the   frames     that    were    lost     or
 corrupted,     not      all    subsequent
 frames.
 How Selective Repeat Works
 The sender can send multiple frames up to a specified window size without

 waiting for ACKs.

       The receiver can accept and buffer frames out of order.

      If a frame is lost or corrupted:

         The receiver discards only that frame.

         Sends a Negative ACK (NACK) or simply doesn’t ACK that frame.

      The sender retransmits only the missing frame, not the whole window.
https://media.pearsoncmg.com/ph/esm/ecs_kurose_compnetwork_8/cw/content/interactiveanimations/selective-repeat-
protocol/index.html
Please fill the feedback form
Thank You
